docs/content/docs/checks/node_checks/description.md, before:

---
title: Description
type: docs
prev: docs/node_checks
sidebar:
  open: true
---


### Check: `has_description`

<br>
<details open>
<summary>has_description details</summary>
<br>
This check ensures that every dbt node (model, seed, source, macro, etc.) has a description provided in the configuration.

---

**Configuration**
<details>
<summary>Common Check Config</summary>

- **name**: Human-readable name of the check
- **severity**: `"error"` (fail) or `"warning"` (warn only).
  - *(optional, defaults to `"error"` if not specified)*
- **description**: Human-readable explanation of the rule.
- **applies_to**: *(optional)* List of node types to check.
  - If omitted, defaults to `["models", "seeds", "sources", "macros"]`.
  - Options: `TODO`

</details>

- **type**: Must be `has_description`.

**Example Config**

```yaml
manifest_tests:
  - name: "models_must_have_description"
    type: "has_description"
    description: "All nodes must have a description."
    # severity: "warning"  (optional)
    # applies_to: ['models', 'seeds'] (optional)
```

<details closed>
<summary>Relevant dbt code</summary>

```yaml
models:
  - name: model_with_description
    description: This is a model with a description
  - name: model_without_description
```

</details>

</details>

Commit message:

docs(config): update documentaton for includes/excludes

docs/content/docs/checks/node_checks/description.md, after:

---
title: Description
type: docs
prev: docs/node_checks
sidebar:
  open: true
---


### Check: `has_description`

<br>
<details open>
<summary>has_description details</summary>
<br>
This check ensures that every dbt node (model, seed, source, macro, etc.) has a description provided in the configuration.

---

**Configuration**

- **type**: Must be `has_description`.
- **applies_to**: *(optional)* List of node types to check.
  - Default: `["models", "sources", "seeds", "exposures", "snapshots"]`
  - Options: `models`, `sources`, `seeds`, `exposures`, `snapshots`

{{< include-markdown "content/snippets/common_check_config.md" >}}

**Example Config**

```yaml
manifest_tests:
  - name: "models_must_have_description"
    type: "has_description"
    description: "All nodes must have a description."
    # severity: "warning"  (optional)
    # applies_to: ['models', 'seeds'] (optional
    # includes: ["path/to/include/*"]
    # excludes: ["path/to/exclude/*"]

```

<details closed>
<summary>Relevant dbt code</summary>

```yaml
models:
  - name: model_with_description
    description: This is a model with a description
  - name: model_without_description
```

</details>

</details>
